[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Did you ever consider
using a midwife?
>> I never did.
>> I would not.
>> To say I was even
familiar with the word.
I don't even know if I was.
>> I thought it meant having
a baby in a barn somewhere.
>> I don't even know how I would
describe the type of person
that I would think that would
have a type of birth like this.
>> She's having her
baby on a full moon.
It certainly looks
like a full moon.
>> Would you ever have
considered using a midwife?
>> Probably not.
I like the doctor aspect of it.
>> It's done.
Surgery-- 1, 2, 3.
>> It's me.
The door was open downstairs,
so I didn't have to ring.
Yeah.
Feel it?
You can just pretend
I'm not here.
If it's too early,
it's too early.
Just sit there and do
whatever you need to do.
>> Maternity care in the
United States is in crisis.
It's in many ways a disaster.
>> Medical decisions are being
made for monetary and legal
reasons, not because
they're good for the mother
and the baby.
>> Technology is technology.
It's not stopping.
This is what life is all about.
So if you're going
to have good stuff,
you might as well use it
to get the best outcome.
>> We should constantly
be asking ourselves,
is this an improvement or
are we making things worse?
>> If we don't quickly
take a hold of this,
we're going to
lose normal birth.
>> I call it feminist machoism.
When you're pushing a baby in
a stroller three months later,
they'll say, I did it naturally.
Personally, I don't
think it's important.
>> There is so little
understanding of how incredibly
important this
process is to women.
>> There's something going
on in the nature of care
in the United States
that's troublesome.
Women have been
told for years now
that they're not responsible
for their own birth process.
>> Basically, what the medical
profession has done over
the last 40, 50 years is
convince the vast majority
of women that they
don't know how to birth.
>> My first instinct is, how
many birds had to die for this?
>> This woman comes
up to me and she goes,
so what kind of birth
are you going to have?
And I was like, what
kind of question is that?
She said, well, when are
you going to be induced?
And I was like, she's
really asking me this.
And I was like, I'm not
going to be induced.
The baby's going to come
when he's good and ready.
And she said, oh.
Well, I just heard how
New York women are all
scheduling their births.
And she goes, they're
calling it designer birth.
And I was like, I've
heard of designer birth.
And she goes, when you
schedule your delivery,
you schedule your
cesarean, and then
they do a tummy tuck
right afterwards.
And I was like,
well, those are women
who have much bigger parties
to attend to than I do.
>> She's already so gorgeous,
I don't know what to say.
>> Wow.
>> I started going to a midwife
for well woman care seven years
ago.
Unless I had a problem,
I can't imagine
going back to an OB/GYN.
The care is great.
And there are a lot of
things that just make sense.
>> Yeah, what was
startling to me was that
if you're delivering with
a traditional doctor,
you might go in and have a
plan and it might change pretty
quickly based on a doctor's
decision which didn't seem
necessarily--
unless there were
medical reasons for it,
at least try to stick
to your original plan.
>> Hi there.
Thank you.
When I had my
first child, I went
in wanting the natural
birth experience.
And I ended up having a
lot of what I considered
to be unnecessary intervention.
And I felt that I was somehow
cheated from the experience
that I initially went after.
And it felt like if I
were ever to do it again,
I wanted to do
things differently.
And so I started to get my
hands on everything I could.
I went to birth conferences.
I started to get educated
on all these issues.
Is that the one that
actually got me so inspired?
I saw her speak at the
birthing conference.
Look at this.
>> Oh my God.
>> Look at her with her braids.
It doesn't get more granola
than this, but she blew my mind.
>> Really?
>> Maybe we can try to
interview her when she's doing
a conference or something.
It became my passion.
And I wanted to
do a project where
I could explore the system
of birth in this country
and raise questions as to are
we benefiting mothers and babies
or not?
>> Can I put the tube
in the baby's head?
>> Only if I can
do the episiotomy.
>> Today, most obstetricians--
most of them have no idea
of what a birth can be like.
>> Very few doctors have
ever observed a normal birth
in medical school
or in the hospital.
It's almost an oxymoron.
>> How often do you get to
see a fully natural birth?
>> Rarely.
>> Almost never.
>> Well, I always think that
midwives do a better job
at the normal
deliveries than we do.
For a normal, low
risk woman, it's
overkill going to a doctor.
It's just too much.
The doctor is not really
excited about things
when they're normal.
>> The EEG, the BP
monitor, and the ABV.
>> Yes, doctor.
>> And get the
machine that goes--
ping!
>> Because obstetricians
are socialized to search
for pathology, they often
see pathology where it
doesn't exist.
They find pathology, because
then they have something to do.
>> An obstetrician
is a trained surgeon.
And usually very, very good
at what he or she does.
And thank goodness we have them.
I'm so grateful that
we have obstetricians.
>> They're surgeons.
They should be doing
surgery all day,
every day when it's needed.
They should not be doing normal
births, because they're not
trained in it.
They have no idea how to do it.
>> Everywhere else in the
world, that's what they do.
You can go to Great Britain,
you can go to France, Germany,
Scandinavia,
Australia, New Zealand,
Japan-- go to all the
highly developed countries
where they are losing fewer
women and fewer babies
around the time of birth.
And what do you see?
You see midwives attending
70% or 80% of all the births.
And the doctors
are there to take
care of the small percent that
develop the complications.
That is the proven system
everywhere in the world.
And the United
States stands alone.
>> The United States is ranked
poorly in terms of infant
mortality.
If you look only at the seven
countries that had at least
400,000 births, it's last.
One of the arguments
that's made is
that's because we
have different women--
that we have more
high-risk women.
But this blaming of
women is farcical.
It's not about mothers.
It's about the way we treat
care in the United States.
But nobody ever wants
to admit there's
a difficulty inherent
in the system.
>> This is the outcome
when you are a century
or so post-midwives.
You lose a lot of knowledge.
And we're the one country when
birth went into the hospital,
the midwives didn't
go there with it.
>> In the early 1900s,
physicians mostly in the East,
but also in the deep
South to some extent,
went on a very effective smear
campaign against midwives.
They would make posters
showing a Black granny
midwife in a very poor home
delivering a baby and saying,
would you want this kind of
person to deliver your baby?
>> It was a cultural shift
where midwives were portrayed
as a vestige of the old country.
They were dirty.
They were ignorant.
They were illiterate.
And so hospitals were offered as
this gleaming, wonderful place
where you could go
and have a baby that
would be cleaner and safer.
The reality, of course,
was that giving birth
with an obstetrician
at that time
was much more dangerous than
giving birth with the midwife,
because doctors were
graduating from medical school.
Many of them had not
witnessed a live birth
before they set out to practice.
>> What happened was the OB/GYN
specialty hospital started
to sprout up.
And those professionals
started to multiply.
And they needed a job.
Business took over.
All of a sudden, the
concept of normal changed.
>> Obstetrics-- I said
in the New York Times,
my wife is mad at
the way I say this.
So I'll say it the way
she wants me to say it.
It's 98% not exciting
and 2% sheer terror.
And you don't know when the
2% terror is going to happen.
And it goes from being
completely normal to 2% terror.
And when you're in a hospital--
and I don't like
hospitals, in general.
The idea that they're not
healing places in general.
But they are good for
when you have that terror.
>> My issue is for those
women that have the normal--
the 90% that have
no complications.
They come through the hospital
and they're put through these--
it's like a system where
they're flat on their--
>> It is, totally.
>> They want a natural birth.
They want to have
a vaginal birth.
And there's all these things
that are stacked against them.
>> That's right.
Absolutely.
>> They've told
women, come to us.
We'll take care of
everybody's birth.
It doesn't matter what
kind of birth you want.
We're open to anything.
And then you get there and
you realize, no, the hospital
system is really set up one way
to handle one kind of birth.
And you just get put
through that system.
And it's a fight to try to not
get put through that system.
>> Oh, she was 2 to 390.
Excellent.
>> This is Pitocin, which is the
medication given through the IV
that causes contractions.
2, induction is doing fine.
>> Just check the tube on fit.
>> How much Demerol
were you going to give?
>> Room 3 being induced.
>> Give the equivalent of--
>> Just be sure you're
going up on the Pit.
>> Just make sure that she's
on Pit and that's something
happening with her induction.
>> Pit her means to basically
instructing the nurse to start
Pitocin.
>> I asked to keep
upping the Pit.
>> Probably about 90% of our
patients at some point are
on some type of augmentation.
>> She's not anywhere
near adequacy,
so we would have to keep it up.
>> If you're not making that
change in that segment of time
that we're looking for,
then we're going to try
to facilitate things.
>> Maybe start Pit?
So we have the Pitocin.
Pit at 6:30.
>> Hospitals are businesses.
They want those beds
filled and emptied.
They don't want women hanging
around in the labor room.
You have this feeling
of the hospital
where there's a limit to how
long you can be in labor.
Oh, it's been 12 hours,
so now you need Pitocin.
>> I did know the pressure was
on as we got into 20 hours,
21 hours.
>> At the hospital,
I had Pitocin.
And then that made me itchy,
so they give you something else
for your itching.
>> I knew once they
gave you that Pitocin,
you need the epidural.
>> You feel better now
that you have the epidural?
>> Oh my God, yes.
>> And then things
come on really strong,
so then you get an epidural.
>> And if you're uncomfortable,
we can always give you more.
>> It was very easy for them
to start doing things that we
hadn't really wanted them to
do, like Pitocin and whatnot,
because I already
had the IV in my arm.
>> They don't really
give you the option.
>> And then another epidural,
because nothing was happening.
>> You're having a
contraction right now.
>> I don't feel the pain.
>> Automatically, they were
like, oh, you need an epidural.
We'll get the anesthesiologist.
>> So she's getting
her epidural,
then we'll put in the
Foley bulb for induction.
>> They gave me another
drug called Stadol.
>> 17 hours of Pitocin.
>> They gave me that and
I remember that made me--
I was like, what's going on?
What's going on?
There's something wrong.
>> Cervidil was the end.
Once Cervidil happened, any
chance beyond that was gone.
It was gone.
>> I hated that drug.
>> It seemed to me that once
they started an intervention,
they all just--
it was a domino effect.
>> The whole thing is like
a big snowball effect.
>> In the hospital, you're
not allowed to have very long
labors.
So if you are not
dilating rapidly,
which you're likely
not to do if you
get an epidural early in labor,
you will be given Pitocin.
They'll put the
Pitocin in the IV.
It will flow into your veins.
Pitocin makes contractions
longer and stronger and closer
together, so then the pain
of labor is much worse.
So you go with that for a while
because you have the epidural,
but eventually the pain
of the contractions
is overwhelming the epidural.
You need to up the epidural.
And then labor slows down
more because of that,
so then you need more Pitocin.
Now you're not feeling the
pain of the extra Pitocin
because you've got the
epidural, but your baby
is getting compressed blood an
oxygen supply, because Pitocin
contractions last so
long and are so strong,
the blood and oxygen flow
to the baby is compromised.
So then the baby's likely
to go into distress.
And then you're sent off
for an emergency cesarean
from a baby in distress
from contractions
induced by the
Pitocin, which was
necessitated by the epidural.
>> Step by step, one
intervention leads to a series
of interventions.
And the net result is the mother
finally ends up with a cesarean
and everybody says,
thank God we were
able to do all those
interventions to save
your baby.
The fact of the
matter is if they
didn't stop the cascade of
interventions, none of that
would have been necessary.
>> There is clearly an
association with induction
of labor and cesarean delivery.
>> People don't have
the information.
When you look at
obstetrics in general,
there's been a series of
very intense interventions
that physicians have
been doing day in
and day out to
millions of women.
And there's not a
medically justified reason
for doing those things.
Even common sense-- I mean
the idea of lying down
with your legs up being the most
comfortable or logical position
to give birth.
>> The more you can move through
your labor and the more you can
move through contractions,
they don't seem as intense.
To lay still-- it's like,
who would want to do this?
I just want to get out of
this bed and move my hips.
>> The lithotomy position
is the most physiologically
dysfunctional position
ever invented for birth,
because putting the mother flat
on her back literally makes
the pelvis smaller.
It makes it much more
difficult for the woman
to use her stomach muscles
to push, and therefore
makes it much more likely
that an episiotomy will be cut
or forceps will be used or the
vacuum extractor will be used.
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> When the baby
goes in the womb,
she starts the birth like
this, and then go like this.
But when he finds a little
spot here in the spine,
then he needs to do like this.
And that means that
the mother probably
is going to shake the pelvic.
And that means that
the baby's moving,
and then he goes
a little bit more.
And then he needs
to do it again.
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Push, push.
>> Push, push, push.
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Women have given up
their autonomy about birth.
Women are so afraid of
birth, because you do not
have an image of what
birth looks like.
Women in America don't know
what's normal about birth.
>> They watch A Baby Story
and they watch Maternity Ward.
They watch these programs.
I think there's a
lot of fear instilled
in women around birth.
>> Every birth that you see on
television is women screaming
and being rushed down the
hallway and looking like
an absolute dire emergency.
So why should women feel
confident about giving birth
when the whole culture is
telling them this is scary,
this is dangerous?
>> Women expect to have
traumatic experiences.
That's why they're
all having epidurals,
because they're terrified
of what this is.
>> The births on television
are very dramatic.
I would be extremely
frightened, too,
if I saw these
women strapped in.
There is always
some sort of danger,
that the doctor comes
in and saves the women.
>> Mommy, the baby's heart rate
is going a little bit down.
And I don't like that.
So next contraction,
if you're not
going to push the
baby out by yourself,
I will help you with the vacuum.
>> Obviously, if
people are playing
the your baby's in
danger card, that's it.
That's when the battle is over.
>> Mommy, we need to
deliver this baby, OK?
Listen to me.
You need to concentrate about
your contraction, and push.
>> That's one of the great
manipulative techniques that
are used is when a woman
starts to question-- wait,
why do we need to do this?
Wait, is there something
else we can do?
The first thing
you turn to is, oh,
it's for the good of the baby.
Whether or not it is,
you'll do anything,
because if you go on to
question it, well, then
you're a bad mom.
So who's going to do that?
>> It's been about two hours,
so I recommend a vacuum-assisted
delivery.
It's not as if I'm just going
to pull the baby out of you.
I'm just going to
assist in your effort.
Because it's time.
>> You get a one-sided story
and it's very easy to convince
a woman to have this
procedure or that procedure,
especially because there's
a huge power disparity.
>> What is the risk to the baby?
>> Minimal.
>> So if you're in labor
and the doctor says, wow,
I think we need to do X.
You're going to say, yeah.
We better do X. The doctor
may think he's offering you
an option, but you
hear the expert
advising you to do something.
>> What do I do?
>> Nothing, dear.
You're not qualified.
>> Sedate her.
>> Number the child.
>> Measured its blood
type and isolate it.
>> Well, I'm totally
curious about your project.
I'm sorry I don't know more
about your work and who you are
and how long you've been
working on this project
and what got you interested
or fascinated and all
of that stuff, Abby, for sure.
>> Oh, yeah.
I mean, Ricki is the one who--
Ricki had two births,
the second one at home.
So she brought me into
this just as a filmmaker.
And then I just happened
to get pregnant.
>> Oh my God.
Are you pregnant now?
>> Yeah.
>> Oh, congratulations.
That's awesome.
>> Thank you.
One of the reasons.
I wanted to do this project
is I wanted to explore--
for me, having the two very
different birth experiences.
Both really amazing
and beautiful.
But for me, it was
just as much a priority
to have the memory of
the process of being
pregnant and delivering and the
rite of passage and remembering
everything, feeling everything.
And so many of my peers
and women in our society,
they don't care about that.
They just want the end result of
the healthy baby in their arms.
And they don't care
how it got there.
And that's something I
really wanted to explore,
because I feel like so
many women are missing
this amazing opportunity.
And this life-altering
experience.
I feel like so much of
who I am today comes
from that experience.
>> Oh, I know.
It's hugely transformative.
And I think just
looking at-- you're
going to be transformed by
your birth, like it or not.
>> Right.
>> A woman, as
long as she lives,
will remember how she was
made to feel at her birth.
>> The way I've explained
birth sometimes,
at least my personal
experience to people,
is it's like you switch on
a light switch and you go
to the moon.
It's an otherworldly experience.
Nothing compares
to the privilege
of giving life and the
responsibility of that.
Nothing.
So if you don't
have the reverence
and the respect for that,
where do you go from there?
>> A woman really doesn't
need to be rescued.
It's not the place for the
knight in shining armor.
It's the place for her to
face her darkest moment
and lay claim to her
victory so that she
can lay claim to her victory
after she's done it, I think.
>> Many people have described
birth as a rite of passage.
And it is certainly a
life-altering experience.
And it can be a
beautiful, incredible,
empowering life-altering
experience or it can be
a devastating,
traumatic, scarring--
literally and
figuratively-- experience.
>> Yeah, we can take that.
>> Stand behind me.
>> Melba.
Melba, remember, no crying.
You got to breathe, OK?
>> We're going to put
you on a stretcher.
and then we're going
to take you to the OR.
>> It's time, OK?
>> We are completely lost.
And we have even
forgotten to raise
the most simple questions.
What are the basic
needs of women in labor?
And the fact that the
midwives have disappeared
is a symptom of lack
of understanding
of the basic needs
of women in labor.
Like a traveler who
suddenly can realize that
he took a wrong way.
He took a wrong way.
The best thing to
do in this case
is to go back to square
one, the point of departure,
and to take another direction.
>> Oh, that's what I
should do-- take Flatbush.
I went to nursing school
at Columbia University
and then became an obstetrical
nurse in the labor room, where
I practiced for five years.
After that, I went
to midwifery school
and then practiced for a
year in hospital, four years
at an out-of-hospital
birthing center,
and then I began my
own solo home birth
practice, which I've been
doing for the last 10 years.
I like to see them
in their homes.
The rationale for
that is, first of all,
they're going to have
the baby in the home.
Secondly, I'd rather be on their
turf than them be on my turf.
I'd rather them build
a comfortable ambience
that I get to see them
in on a regular basis,
so that by the time
it's time for the birth,
they know where their
rooms are, their bathrooms.
And it's pretty much just the
philosophical underpinnings
of giving the power
back to the woman.
Breathe in deep
through your mouth.
They sound really clear.
That's really good.
One colander is good.
I can use that to put
my instruments in,
the glove and blah, blah, blah.
>> And then the placenta,
I have a large freezer bag.
Is that OK?
>> Yeah.
Actually, do two
gallon-size Ziploc bags.
It's better for New
York City freezers,
because you can put
some masking tape on it.
>> Placenta.
>> You can do it.
You want to go first?
Or you want me to show you
first and then you take a turn?
>> You go first.
>> OK.
>> What do you
think, pretty big?
You think it's
ready to come out?
>> I think so.
>> Definitely.
>> Yeah.
>> I do believe that women
who choose home birth,
they do share something.
It could be just a
feeling that she knows
how she wants to do things.
And then I think
when she's in labor,
she can interact with her
labor in a different way
than if everybody is
doing things to her
and making decisions about her.
>> Baby.
>> Yeah, I checked.
It is warm.
>> Oh.
Oh.
>> That's really close, Lauren.
That's great.
>> Today, what we have to
discover is how easy birth can
be when we don't try to
make things too complicated,
when ideally there is nobody
around but an experienced,
motherly, and silent,
low profile midwife.
>> No, no.
>> Mama?
>> There she is.
>> Somebody else look at the
time, because I missed it.
>> Make sure she's
above the water.
Let me just see.
OK, good.
I got it.
Yeah.
You're done.
She's fine.
It's OK.
Do whatever you need to do.
I'm just going to
keep an eye on her.
>> Hi.
Be careful.
>> Cord's a little short.
>> Yeah, a little short.
>> Yeah.
>> I went online and I found
that New York hospitals had
some of the highest cesarean
rates in the nation.
That actually
really surprised me.
I guess I expected New York
women to be more like, hey,
I'm taking charge.
So I was surprised.
And I was scared.
I knew what interventions
I was OK with.
And they were pretty much zero.
I really understand
that things can
go wrong during pregnancy,
just like with anything else.
But I don't want that to be
precipitated, so to speak.
I said, David, this
isn't looking good.
And that's when I started to
interview midwives in the city.
I just feel like
I trust my body.
>> That's great.
>> I really just want to--
I have a feeling that this is
the way you run things anyway.
But I just wanted to let my
body do what it's going to do.
>> And it so does.
I don't even run things.
Your body runs things.
And it's respecting that.
And then I'm like the
guardian of safety
and the witness of your process.
I really do firmly
believe, oftentimes,
that the body is
smarter than me.
And I'm not that dumb.
>> I spoke to her yesterday.
She did not attend
this appointment.
>> OK.
But you were able
to reach her here.
OK, I'll call her.
Remember, that tongue ring?
Let me see.
That's got to come
out before delivery.
You didn't push that long
to have this 9-pound baby.
You did a fabulous job.
I was so impressed.
A lot of women walk
in with the ideas
that I definitely
want an epidural
or I don't want
anything-- or maybe just
a little bit of sedation.
And it's OK.
She has options.
I know you want to go natural
and do everything normal,
and that's fine.
We're going to take
one step at a time.
That's all we can do--
one contraction at a time.
Next thing you know,
this baby will be out.
You'll be breastfeeding
and laughing up a storm.
>> I hope.
>> Oh, yeah.
They all come out,
one way or the other.
I have three
beautiful daughters.
And unfortunately, I wasn't
able to have a midwife.
I was high-risk.
So I had an M.D. and he
wasn't with me the whole time.
He came in to do the
delivery and he would leave.
And I knew then that there's
got to be a different way.
>> Yeah, you were saying
you've never missed a birth.
>> Yeah, I don't miss births.
I missed one on 9/11.
I couldn't get back
into the city at all.
>> That's it.
That's the only one you missed?
>> That's the only one I missed.
The baby's head is
coming down now, Gayle.
And eventually, that
pressure will just stay.
But I'd like to know
about that before you
do your little squat thing.
Women come to me all
the time that have
had births in a
traditional OB/GYN setting.
And it is a totally
different experience.
And they spread the word.
But unfortunately, it's just
not enough to turn this around
for us.
>> You want to go in?
>> You go in.
>> We're going to
28th and 8th, please.
Can I tell you something?
It is so hard to find
this birth stuff.
>> Really?
>> Oh my God.
>> Is the researcher
still doing stuff or no?
>> Yeah.
>> That was the
twilight sleep cribs.
It looks like a torture chamber.
>> Look at what
they did to them.
It was a straitjacket.
>> Oh my God.
>> Look at that.
They blindfolded them.
>> What year is this?
>> This is in the 20s.
>> The drug scopolamine
was invented in Germany
in the early 1900s.
And American women
found out about it.
Remember that at
that time, women
were still being told that
the pain of childbirth
was the curse of Eve.
And that it was because of
Eve's sin in the Garden of Eden
that women had to suffer
during childbirth.
So you can imagine how the
modern liberated feminist
attitude at the time
would be, I certainly
do not have to suffer.
And if there are drugs
around that keep me
from having to
suffer, then I'm going
to go find those drugs,
because I'm a modern woman.
Women thought that it took
away pain during childbirth,
but it doesn't.
It actually just takes away
your memory of the experience.
So scopolamine spread rapidly
across the United States.
And by the 1960s,
almost everyone
was having twilight sleep.
Now, it does take away
memory, but it also
takes away self-control.
It takes away self-awareness.
So women screamed and
tried to climb the walls
and spit in people's
faces and tried
to claw the face of the
doctor or the nurse.
So the hospitals developed the
technique of strapping women
to the hospital
bed with lambswool,
because if you
used anything else,
it would leave marks
on their wrists
and then their
husbands would want
to know what was done to them.
And so women were
literally strapped to beds
and left there for
days, sometimes
in their own poop and pee.
It was a very brutal period
in American birthing history.
>> If you look at obstetrics
for the last 50 years,
what do you find?
In the 1930s, they were giving
X-rays on every pregnant woman
to measure her pelvis.
And then in the
1940s, they discovered
that that caused the
baby to have cancer,
so they had to stop it.
And then in the
1950s and 60s, they
had another drug
called thalidomide,
which caused babies to be
born without arms and legs.
And then they had to stop that.
But you see, in every case,
it was after the fact.
In the 1990s, they
were giving Cytotec
to induce labor in women who
had had a previous cesarean.
And they ended up with
hundreds and hundreds
of ruptured uteruses and
many, many, many dead babies
before they found
out, finally, in 1999
that they shouldn't do that.
But you see, there's
not a good history
in obstetric practice of careful
study of the long-term effects
of all these interventions.
This is why if you really
want a humanized birth,
the best thing to do is to get
the hell out of the hospital.
>> Historically, the birth
movement grew apace again after
it was basically cut out from
under the midwives at the turn
of the century during the hippie
era, when there were communes.
And the communes mimicked
in many ways immigration
communities.
They mimicked extended families.
And so midwives were reborn,
in a sense, during that era.
>> We wanted the choices.
We didn't want somebody
else making the rules that
didn't understand
us-- that thought
we were machines instead
of people with feelings.
Because we knew that
feelings affected birth.
>> That was part of what sparked
the natural childbirth movement
was a reaction against the
abuses of the scopolamine era,
the twilight sleep era.
Because some people realized the
only way to get away from that
was to get out of the
hospital altogether.
Just as we were
getting someplace,
technology caught
up to us again.
The electronic field monitor
got introduced into hospitals
starting in 1970.
And by the end of
the 70s, it was
pervasive in hospital birth.
And the cesarean rate in that
decade went from 4% to 23%.
>> See, when I started, only
5% of women in the US had
cesarean.
10 years passed, and it was
up to about one woman in four.
I couldn't believe it.
And we in our group didn't
need the first cesarean
until birth number 187.
We were going the other way
from the rest of the country.
And we were doing that safely.
>> Here comes another one.
>> Good.
So that told me something
about the pelvis
of the American woman
is just quite fine,
thank you very much.
And we didn't have another
c-section until birth 324.
>> The number of American
women giving birth by cesarean
section is at an all-time high.
>> These days, a record number
of moms are giving birth
by cesarean section.
>> Cesarean sections have now
become the most common major
surgical procedure
performed on women.
>> As we all know, the cesarean
section rate in this country is
going up, up, up.
Why?
What is really, really
underneath this?
Cesarean is extremely
doctor-friendly,
because instead of
having a woman in labor
for an average of 12 hours, 7
days a week, it's 20 minutes
and I'll be home for dinner.
>> There was a study that came
out many years ago which showed
that the c-section-- if you
looked over a 24-hour period,
the peaks in c-sections were
4:00 in the afternoon and 10:00
at night.
So it's obvious that
the 4 in the afternoon
is it's late in the day, I
don't know what's going on here.
I want to get out of here.
And the 10:00 at night is, I
don't want to be up all night.
>> Some doctors have taken
advantage of patients' interest
in cesarean and put it on
the table as an option.
And certainly, it makes the
obstetrician's life potentially
much less complicated.
>> We focused on the
Metropolitan New York area.
And as bad as the Manhattan
rates were-- for instance,
in Suffolk County, they've
got at least two hospitals
that are over a 40% rate.
Westchester has one
that's close to 45%.
These are huge, crazy numbers.
And it's just amazing.
And the public
doesn't know about it.
>> The underlying problem
is unfortunately litigation.
>> There is a doctor who
trained me who used to say,
they can never fault you
if you just section them.
Just section them.
>> There's definitely a standard
that, at the end of the day,
if you did the c-section, you
did everything that you could
to get the baby out.
So the c-section
may be done faster.
>> And that's pretty much the
current thinking, it seems,
in obstetrics is like,
oh, we might get sued.
So let's just do
c-sections on everybody.
>> It's a growing crisis.
>> Somebody clearly is going
to have to step in and stop
the trend, or else we're
going to get to 100%.
>> Pick a date, write it on
your calendar, have a baby.
>> And the fact that it's
sort of a status thing
at the cocktail
party to say, oh,
I just had an
elective c-section.
An elective c-section is
like having a Prada bag,
then that will drive it also.
>> This whole concept of women
being too posh to push is
a fairly recent phenomenon.
You could attribute it to
Victoria Spice, the Posh Spice
Girl, who has had three
c-sections around her husband's
soccer schedule.
Britney Spears has had two.
The list goes on.
I think if celebrities who
did have home births, who
used midwives, spoke
up about it more,
we would have a more
balanced picture.
If Angelina Jolie had had
a water birth in Africa,
I think that more
women would have been
clamoring for water births.
I really do.
>> Women have gotten so
accustomed to plastic surgery
in this country.
18-year-olds are
going in and having
all kinds of things done
because, again, that's
where this country is going.
Whereas in 1990, the thought of
a doctor doing surgery on you
was, oh my God.
Now women are having
so much surgery
done that the thought
of an elective c-section
is, to them, just
more plastic surgery.
>> In many medical circles,
there are people who claim that
in the future, most women will
prefer to have an elective
cesarean section.
But when you talk about that
with certain women who still
have a sort of intuitive
knowledge of the importance
of what's happening
when the baby is born,
they cannot accept that
cesarean section is the future.
They cannot accept that.
>> I couldn't get
enough information.
I was just blown
away by what I didn't
know the first time around.
And then I knew,
even before I even
planned a second pregnancy,
I wanted it different.
I wanted to do it on my terms.
>> When I knew you then--
I was telling Anna
that I just thought--
>> What a weird thing.
>> Yeah.
I just thought, it
seems a little crazy.
This is just a part
of Ricki's other side.
This is some other hidden,
radical, rebel part of Ricki.
>> It's weird.
You know me, I love
pain medication.
I love numbing myself.
I don't want to feel a headache.
I'm that person, too.
But when it came to giving
birth, it wasn't an illness.
It wasn't something that
needed to be numbed.
It needed to be experienced.
And I remember I was
in a lot of pain.
I was enduring just about the
worst part-- almost the worst
part.
I didn't lose my sense of
humor because I'm naked.
And an ambulance went by and
I was like, that's my ride.
Get me the fuck out of here.
I want to go to the hospital.
I want my epidural.
I don't know if I can do this.
My midwife reminded me of
all the reasons of at-home
and what I wanted to avoid.
And the gift I was
giving my baby.
And I was like, yes.
And I got through
that contraction.
And you're one step closer,
you're one step closer.
>> This is you having your baby.
>> OK.
We ended up in my
bathroom standing there.
I was leaning up
against the towel rack.
I'm going to push a little.
>> Yeah.
I'm here.
Awesome.
Let's get the baby.
>> Really, you think?
At a certain point, I
just gave in to the pain.
I just let go and surrendered.
And that's when things
went really quickly.
>> OK.
>> At one point, she said, reach
down and pull out your baby.
And I did.
>> Ricki, open your eyes.
Reach down and
pick up your baby.
>> No way.
>> Pick him up.
>> No.
Oh my God.
Hi.
You're gorgeous.
Oh my God.
Why is he not crying?
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
>> Oh, look at him.
We had our baby.
>> You sure did.
>> That is just
everything to me.
I could start sobbing right now.
It was so empowering.
And it was like, finally.
This is what I was after.
This is what I
wanted for my child.
[BABY CRYING]
>> That's what
we're looking for.
Oh my God.
Hi.
Does he have 10
fingers and 10 toes?
Should I keep him in the water?
>> Yeah.
>> Here you are.
And let's say you're in the
midst of a contraction, right?
Taking some nice, deep breaths
and trying to focus on that
is very integral,
generally, to coping.
>> When the home birth
came up, I was like, yeah.
Let's do this.
We talked about the
benefits of the home birth,
the benefits of breastfeeding.
Afterwards, the
effects on the baby.
I was very supportive of it.
>> You feel it?
>> Yeah.
>> That's the head.
So we know the head is down
and it's going to stay down.
>> It was like, wow.
This is really something
that I hadn't thought of.
When you just aren't
exposed to it,
you just believe what you hear
until you see it for yourself.
>> The research on home birth
is pretty consistent in showing
that in a supported
environment--
and supported
means soup-to-nuts,
that the people there are
trained, that there's back-up,
that they can transfer
to the hospital quickly--
all of those things--
that the outcomes of home
births are very, very good.
Consistently, at least as good,
and generally better than they
would be in a hospital birth.
>> The gist of all the studies
are that home birth is safe
and they've set guidelines by
which you have to determine
whether or not a person is a
good candidate for home birth.
So you have to look at
their medical health.
You have to look at their
previous pregnancies.
And then you have to be prepared
in labor for the eventuality
of transfer.
And you have to make the
judgment call in time.
>> To me, delivering a
baby at home, for instance,
with a midwife or some other
birth person is like me saying
to you, oh, you don't have
to wear your seat belt when
you're in my car because
I'm a safe driver.
>> What scares me about
home birth is that--
I don't know, would a home
birth have fetal monitoring?
Because I'm not that in touch
with it since I don't do it.
>> Some people have this image
that a home birth midwife comes
walking into somebody's house
with a little towel that they
roll up and ask the
mother to bite on.
And the fact of the matter is,
they bring Pitocin, oxygen,
equipment for suturing, for
resuscitation of the baby.
Trained home birth
midwives are incredibly
skilled at what they do.
>> In a postpartum hemorrhage,
you can lose your entire blood
supply in about five minutes.
>> If you think a mother has
a higher chance of bleeding,
you have the Pitocin drawn up.
You have the IV warmed
here right by the side.
You don't wait to go get it.
>> Fetal distress, cord
prolapse, a fetal bradycardia.
That doesn't come up?
How are you going to
get somebody's section
or emergently
delivered from home?
It's not so easy.
>> People think that when you
do birth at home that you're not
necessarily prepared for that
eventuality and that everything
has to go great, but it doesn't.
>> The Netherlands loses
fewer women than we do.
The Netherlands loses
fewer babies than we do.
And one third of their births
are planned home births.
>> So have you decided what
kind of stroller you want?
>> This is the one Paolo
liked on the beach.
Phil and Ted.
>> So you really are planning
the second kid already?
>> No, actually.
This is great to go shopping.
Look at that.
She can go shopping by herself
and put all the crap in here.
>> So you don't
have to do anything.
>> Exactly.
>> Hi.
>> That's Moritz.
>> Just right there?
>> He's our editor moonlighting
as camera-person today.
>> Final Cut Pro?
>> You can see your
abs look incredible.
>> This child exploded
in the past four weeks.
>> That's exactly what happened.
>> But there's a lot
of fluttery down here.
>> Then the feet
must have come down.
>> Must be, right?
>> Because if you're
fluttering down at the bottom,
then it's got to
be the feet down.
>> Because last
time it was head.
>> Yeah.
You can feel a lot.
>> If you feel fluttering down
the vagina, down at the bottom.
>> Yeah.
>> Then it's got to the feet.
>> That's it.
>> Yeah, sure enough.
We don't even need the machine.
See?
It's butt down.
Those are the feet down there.
His butt's right
down to the bottom.
>> Oh, I see.
>> In terms of growth,
you're right on the growth.
You're right in the
50th percentile.
And 2 pounds, 3 ounces.
>> So birth-wise.
And of course, we're
making this movie,
so we're seen a lot
more than other people.
But we really are
really considering
going the home birth with Kara.
>> Go.
I think it's fine.
I'll be your backup.
>> Thank you.
>> Now, I don't know what
that means, being your backup.
I have to talk to Kara.
I don't think I can
be at your house.
But I can be available.
And I can definitely
make it that, God forbid,
you come into the
hospital-- not God forbid,
but if you come in even
because you're tired
or you just want to
do it, that you're not
going to be treated as a leper.
That would be the word.
So you don't come in
and people look at you
and say, oh, home birth, huh?
Yeah.
Why don't you sit over here?
>> Right.
>> So you definitely won't be
treated like that, obviously.
>> Right.
>> That's not a thing.
But I'd say go for it.
>> Yeah?
Because that's how we feel.
If we changed our lines
at the last minute--
>> You can't change
too-too late.
>> No, I don't mean like that.
But I mean suddenly if I was
still breech at full term
or something.
>> That's not a big deal.
We'll know that anyhow,
one way or another.
I don't think we're going
to have those surprises.
>> Right.
>> I've had Moritz
back me many times.
And I could go to St Vincent's.
We could go to Moritz.
It would depend on what
the circumstances were.
>> For me, it was just
like I was thinking, well,
if we do a home birth
and we transfer,
I love the idea of possibly
being able to transfer
to a birth center.
>> Right.
>> You know what I mean?
And you would be able--
>> But if you transfer, you're
not going to a birth center
for the most part.
You have to think like that.
If you transfer, it's because
you need intervention.
>> Right.
My only fear, which
is not even a fear,
is that I would suddenly in the
heat of labor change my mind
and say, Oh my God.
I think I'm dying.
I need to be in a hospital.
>> You're meeting the midwife
who's going to write the book,
Home Birth Midwife
Begged for Cesarean.
>> I know.
>> Because I did.
>> As much as I've had training
in midwifery and as much
as I've been caring for women
in labor for the last 25 years
of my life, I would have to
say that I was not your model
patient.
The only good
thing I have to say
is that I get to
labor in the day.
I would have walked
myself over to Beth.
In fact, I'm surprised
that I didn't.
OK.
You guys stay here.
I'll be back with the baby.
So while I was trying
to escape labor,
I met a place that I think a
lot of women meet in labor.
The rock and the hard place.
Oh.
Every single woman who
is having natural birth
feels like that at
a certain point.
The rock is I'm not pushing
because it hurts too much.
And the hard place is OK, then.
You're staying pregnant forever.
And it's going to hurt forever.
So it's the most
infuriating place to be.
That pain is just awful.
In the process, I told
everybody around me
that they weren't helping me.
Don't move.
Ow.
That I wanted them to get
out and get my mother, who I
didn't even want at the birth.
I told everyone,
you're not helping me.
Get out.
That was just me.
Everybody doesn't say that.
And I sat in the bathtub and
looked at the faucet and said,
it's me.
I'm either dying or I'm
pushing the baby out.
The fact that I had
a difficult labor--
I'm ready to do it.
I'm ready to push.
It's a good thing
for me as a midwife,
because I feel that
I know how hard it
can get for a woman who's
going through labor.
And when I went back to
work, the first woman
I looked at in labor,
I was of no help to.
I just looked at her
and I said, I know.
I know.
And I was lost in the
empathy, because I
felt so sorry that she was on
the other side of that place.
And I couldn't-- and
that she had to be there.
No, no.
OK.
>> 10:12.
>> I can never hear
anything on this.
>> Try like this.
Close your eyes.
>> The whole insurance
thing has been crazy.
I called and I
said, I'm pregnant.
OK, who's your doctor?
Well, I don't have a doctor.
I'm going with a midwife.
And they were like,
OK, but which hospital?
Everyone I talked to
there was just like,
what do you mean a home birth?
But aren't you going to
have a doctor delivering it?
I'm like, no.
Why is this so difficult?
I don't understand why this
is such a difficult thing.
Everybody was acting like I
had a third eye or something.
>> Officially, 37 weeks.
>> We'll do the beta
strep culture today.
>> What I really had a hard
time understanding is that
it's cheaper to have
a birth with midwives.
You'd think they
would be all over it.
>> There's some hospitals in
New Hampshire where a normal
spontaneous vaginal
delivery is around $13,000.
Hello.
I'm charging $4,000
for everything.
That includes the
post-natal care, everything,
including the facility fee.
>> So it makes you wonder
what their agenda is.
>> The insurance companies
are part of the establishment.
And so when the
obstetricians who
are giving the advice to
the insurance companies
say that home birth is dangerous
or that midwives are not
as safe as doctors and
all of this nonsense,
the establishment CEO in
the insurance companies
believes them.
>> I've interviewed a
lot of nurse midwives.
And I noticed that as soon
as their practice reaches
more than 30% of the women
in a certain hospital,
the doctors will
start firing them,
because that's too
much competition.
>> The AMA, as the trade
organization for physicians,
has a very clear,
publicly-stated stance that
they will not support anything
that allows for non-physicians
to do anything
that physicians do.
You want to talk big
lobby, big dollars,
they can call a lot of shots.
>> I have made several attempts
to get this claim reprocessed.
When I explained to them
that we were clearly covered,
she agreed that the claim
needed to be reprocessed.
But of course, the
computers were down.
>> This is what we go
through, all to get paid.
>> Hi, Millie.
Is Marcia available?
>> When I called the heads
of the insurance company,
I met with them face to face.
And he said, oh,
our hands are tied.
I said, no, they're not.
They're not.
You just don't care.
It's not about health care.
It's not about saving
money for consumers.
And it's not about women
and babies, that's for sure.
>> We got the authorization.
Claims department is not
reading the claim correctly.
It's like I'm begging
you to get paid.
Your members did
not have to beg us
to come in and get treatment.
You'll try and
find her tomorrow.
>> We talk about
giving mothers options.
What isn't talked
about is the degree
to which options are being
closed off to mothers.
One example is birth
centers, which at this point
is at almost an all-time low.
>> My decision to not renew
my malpractice came from a lot
of different places.
Number one, we were
getting letters
from our insurance companies
saying that they're
going to increase the rates.
We aren't making
a living anymore.
>> A lot of people say, oh,
it's an economic battle.
Of course it's an
economic battle.
It's a billion-dollar industry.
>> We spend twice as much in
this country per birth than any
other country in the world.
This is one of those
very rare instances
where cheaper is truly better.
>> It works in all
the other countries.
And when you look at our data,
the amount of money we spend
versus the outcomes
we get, it sucks.
There are countries that spend
a third of what we have and have
lower infant mortality.
So more doesn't mean
more in this case.
And maybe less is more.
>> Run.
>> Why are you running so fast?
>> Because she's
sitting in the car.
>> Sorry to make a
pregnant woman run.
>> No.
>> Stopping was painful.
Abby, this feels a little
bit like living on the edge,
in a way.
But to tell you
the truth, there's
a lot worse edges to live on.
And when you've been there,
this doesn't feel that scary.
>> She has some
over here for that.
>> If I am lecturing to a
roomful of obstetricians and I
put the word home and the word
birth together in the same
sentence, there's just
hysteria in the room.
And then what I always
do is say, OK, OK.
I want everyone in this room
who has ever attended a home
birth, raise your hand.
Nobody.
They've never seen a home birth.
So then I say, you're all
like the geographers who
are trying to describe a
country they've never been to,
because they're too
afraid to go there.
>> Oh.
Oh.
No, it hurts so much.
>> Sorry.
>> Oh.
Oh.
>> Oh, yes, mama.
Yes, yes.
That's so close.
We're seeing much more now.
Let's see.
Oh, we're going to see more.
Oh my goodness.
Let me see if I can
see this baby coming.
Let me see.
Yes, I can.
I can sese his head.
Hang on, mi amor.
It's coming.
>> There you go.
You have your baby.
>> Oh.
Oh my God.
My baby.
Oh, my baby.
Oh my God.
>> That's OK.
>> Oh, my baby.
>> Get that towel, papi.
No, sit down.
Don't get up.
>> Oh, no.
No, it's OK.
It's OK.
>> It's incredible
when it happens
and you're by a woman's side
and she comes to the end of this
journey.
And she says, I knew
I couldn't do it.
I knew I couldn't do it.
And then I did it.
I hit a wall that was higher
than anything I've ever seen
in my life and I scaled it.
>> I'm so--
>> It's a shock.
>> Not believing this.
>> That's OK.
>> You get the highest
oxytocin rush you'll ever have
in your life when you
give birth naturally.
You will go into an altered
state of consciousness
and be in a state of--
yes, there's bliss.
And yes, there's pain.
And it's all tied up together.
And you cannot have the
bliss without the pain.
And it's the intangible
essence of that
that we have so much
trouble conveying to women
who think it's a-- so what?
>> It hurts.
>> I know it does.
It's all right.
You're going to get through
this one just like the last one.
>> Thanks.
That hurts.
>> I think it's so exciting.
It was such an adventure.
It was the most adventurous
day I've ever had in my life.
It trumps the wedding
day, I have to say.
We both agree.
It's crazy to say.
It's a day where you're going
through so much pain and so
much emotion.
It was one of those
days where you
know you're alive, where
you're experiencing something
unique in life.
A lot of pressure now.
>> That's OK.
Breathe.
>> OK.
OK.
Hey Jen, reach down
and take your baby.
[BABY CRYING]
>> Hi, darling.
Happy birthday.
I'm so glad you're out.
Hi.
>> That was fast.
>> Beautiful baby.
You birthed this little girl.
Nice job.
>> You have that natural
high that people described.
You just feel so accomplished.
Nothing compares to this.
>> If I could do that,
I could do anything.
To me, that's the
power of birthing.
And that is what we are
taking away from women.
>> That looks good.
And just support.
>> And that's what
did it for me.
It was seeing the abuses
that happened daily
and that are not even based on
good science or good medicine.
Then when you see,
oh, this is what
it could be if you trusted it--
if you believed in this woman.
If you believed in her
body and her ability, then
you can't tolerate what's
going on right now.
>> Accusations tonight that some
hospitals are not being upfront
with patients who
are expecting a baby.
>> New York State law says that
hospitals must give expectant
mothers information about
the birth procedures
in their hospitals.
But a report out today
charges that the hospitals
are ignoring the law.
>> One of the big problems in
this country is the information
that is given to women.
>> There really is not informed
consent obtained from these
women.
Nobody talks about all of the
downside, all of the things
that can go wrong in a section.
>> The risks of a vaginal
delivery are much less than
a c-section.
And what a lot of
people don't know
is a c-section's major surgery.
>> The literature is very clear
that having a vaginal birth,
statistically, is
the best way to go.
>> The first c-section in almost
everyone is perfectly simple.
It's the second,
it's the third, it's
the fourth, it's the
fifth c-section that
poses a huge risk to the mom, in
terms of injury to her bladder,
injury to the intestines.
We've had patients
where you go in
and the appendix is right
on top of the uterus--
where loops of the bowel are
wrapped around the uterus.
And you have to cut
through all of that
before you can even
get to the baby.
There is blood loss that can't
necessarily be controlled.
>> It's major surgery.
And yet we now present
cesarean section
as if we're cutting
your fingernails.
>> It's another thing, too, that
I think people aren't really
talking about so much now.
I know so many women with
c-sections who end up
with really bad infections.
And they're becoming harder
to treat with antibiotics.
And that's one area where I feel
like we're going back in time
a little bit, because having an
infection that you cannot treat
is so scary.
>> Most of the deaths that do
take place in the United States
happen for women who
went to the hospital.
How do I know that?
Because half the percentage
of women give birth at home.
And yet our death rate is
higher than some third world
countries.
We have areas in the United
States where it's sky high.
>> People in our culture
spend more time and effort
researching to buy a
stereo system, a car,
probably a camera than they do
checking out what their choices
are for birth.
>> Today in the United States,
we know that there is serious
increase in minimal neurological
problems in children
and in attention deficit
disorders, in autism.
All of these things
are increasing
at the same period
of time that we're
increasing all of these
obstetric interventions.
And we don't know.
And maybe next year
or next decade,
we'll discover to our horror
that what happens at birth
is very important to the future
development of that child.
>> One of the things that we
think happens during the whole
labor and delivery process is
that the oxytocin neurons start
squirting out lots of
oxytocin in the brain,
which is the bonding,
protective hormone.
And the oxytocin travels in the
bloodstream down to the uterus
to start triggering the
contractions of labor.
And that's when the switch to
the maternal brain circuits.
The mommy brain gets flipped on.
And the whole brain cocktail
of hormones and neurochemicals
has, for millions of
years, been developed
to keep the mommy absolutely
riveted on protection
of the helpless infant.
One of the things to
remember is Pitocin
is a synthetic
version of oxytocin
that you put intravenously in
a woman when she's in labor.
However, Pitocin doesn't
act as natural oxytocin
would in the brain.
So there's all kinds
of things about
modern medical interventions.
Sometimes they need to
be done, but they also
inhibit this natural maternal
aggression to protect the baby
and to nourish the
baby right after birth
that is normal for mammals
and for human moms.
>> Until recently, love was
a topic for poets, novelists,
philosophers.
Today, it is studied
from multiple scientific
perspectives, with
mammals in general.
There is immediately after
birth a short period of time
which will never
happen again, and which
is critical in
mother-baby attachment.
Until recently, in order to give
birth, a woman like all mammals
is supposed to releases a
complex cocktail of love
hormones.
As soon as baby is born, when
mother and baby are together,
both of them are under the
effect of a sort of morphine,
of opiate--
natural morphine endorphins.
We know the properties, they
create a state of dependency--
addiction.
When mother and baby
are close to each other,
it is the beginning
of an attachment.
But today, most women have
babies without releasing
this flow of hormones.
I'll just give an example
of animal experience.
In general, if you disturb the
hormonal balance of the female
giving birth, it's simple.
The mother does not
take care of her baby.
It's simple.
If monkeys give birth
by cesarean section,
the mother is not
interested in her baby.
It's simple, easy to detect
on the individual level.
So you wonder, but what
about our civilization?
What about the
future of humanity?
If most women have
babies without releasing
this cocktail of love hormones,
can we survive without love?
The point is I'm not
introducing theories.
This is not about theories.
I bring together facts,
what we know today.
So the point is to bring
some facts together
at the right time to
create a new awareness.
[BABY CRYING]
Oh my God.
So cute.
You don't even look--
you look like you're six months.
You don't look big.
>> Really?
I think it's position, too.
You just look carry small.
You're so small.
I would have thought you
would look really much
bigger because you're
so tiny to begin with.
>> This isn't even popped
up all the way, though.
>> He's little.
>> I think I'm measuring
actually like normal.
But he's got four
to five weeks left.
>> Right.
>> He's supposed to be
half a pound a week.
>> Right.
>> So that's three
more pounds of baby.
He'll probably be--
>> She's in the tub.
We're in the bathroom.
So they've been reliably
five minutes apart.
>> Ay-yi-yi.
Hi, cuties.
I bring everything.
I said, let me
just come and see.
It's so funny,
because today, we've
finished doing this interview.
And I was standing there.
And this doctor's--
>> This is the head.
>> Secretary looked at me.
And she said my belly
was going like, whrr.
I can feel it.
>> Well, let's
listen to the guy.
>> I can't believe this.
>> We just got to--
I know she's not
going to lay down.
>> I am.
>> It's OK.
You'll be fully.
You'll be fully and then
driving up 10th Avenue.
You're like 3 or 4 centimeters.
I knew it.
>> Stop it.
Am I really?
>> I knew it.
I'm like-- I just called
and said, she's in labor.
You are.
Relax your legs.
>> I just don't want--
if he doesn't turn
and we decide to turn,
I just don't want to go in--
>> No.
>> So late that I'm in
such crazy active labor.
>> So we have to move quickly.
>> This is so surreal.
>> You don't understand.
I don't even have a diaper.
I don't even have a bassinet.
>> They have diapers.
>> Where is he going to sleep?
There's nothing here.
>> I think he had enough
of this documentary.
He was like, you're
going to drag my ass
to one more boring-ass panel.
The panel was so boring.
>> It was?
>> There were a few moments.
>> I think we should
probably just go,
because I'm worried you're
going to dilate to 8.
And then your bag is
going to be out there.
>> Faster.
>> Oh.
>> Should I get this cab?
>> Yeah.
>> OK, guys.
It's a woman in labor,
so she's coming out.
No, no.
Don't.
Let's just-- yeah.
>> You want me to
sit in the front?
>> I got it.
I got it.
>> Where's the water bottle?
>> I have it.
I have it.
>> Mom?
I'm on my way to St
Luke's right now.
Because I went into labor.
And Kara came over
and the baby's breech.
And he's not turning.
>> Did you call the OB?
>> Yeah, Kara called them.
Yeah.
Oh, wait.
I'm going to have a contraction.
Oh.
Please drive.
Can you go through red lights?
It's really hurting.
This contraction is horrible.
>> It's just got to be over.
>> I know.
>> OK.
Fuck.
I have to get there.
I cannot have another
contraction in this taxicab.
>> We're two blocks away.
Just breathe and relax.
>> Get me out.
Fuck, the water broke.
Please.
>> Lean forward.
>> We are hurrying.
We are right here.
>> Oh my God.
The water is pouring out.
>> Just get me in.
Stretcher, please, stretcher.
Broken water.
>> Wheelchair, wheelchair.
>> Labor.
She's having the baby.
Just calm, just calm.
>> OK.
You're OK.
Good, Abby.
I'm coming.
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
>> We did not stay
home a long time.
Just so you know.
>> You're fine.
>> Thank you so
much for coming in.
>> No problem.
>> I cannot even tell you.
>> Let's get the baby out.
You'll be a mommy here
in probably 20 seconds.
>> Really?
>> Very quickly.
>> You're not allowed
to film in here.
>> Arms around.
>> Easy, easy, easy, easy,
easy, easy, easy, easy.
Easy, easy.
Easy, easy, easy.
nitro working?
>> Yeah.
>> Good.
>> Need some more.
>> Head lift.
>> We got it.
We got it.
Look.
Cut.
>> How come I don't hear him?
>> There's something--
>> OK, no filming right now.
[BABY CRYING]
>> Good morning, my love.
I know.
Where's the thermometer?
Let me find the thermometer.
I think you're more comfortable
here than you were inside
mommy.
Because you were
hungry in there.
You weren't getting any
food and we didn't know.
Yes.
I hope stuff is coming out.
I have no idea if
anything's coming out.
I have no idea.
This is my first time, too.
Yes, that's daddy
with a shitty camera.
That's what he does.
He takes pictures of everything.
It's so silly.
OK.
He's doing great.
Isn't he doing great, though?
Where are we going
to take you first?
You're doing so good.
I can't believe you.
Wow.
Chill out.
>> Matteo wanted to live.
Matteo came out
at the right time.
>> He so did.
>> He was screaming to come out.
And said, I don't like
it in there anymore.
It's outside that's best.
Three weeks or one month of NICU
with Matteo looking like that.
You come home and say, wow.
Life is precious.
>> I wish I didn't have to go
on TV two hours after all that.
>> I got paged out of the OR.
>> Oh, right.
>> I went to another birth.
I had another birth
at 7:30 that morning.
I went straight to the birth.
>> And where was that?
>> Brooklyn.
>> Oh my God.
And that was a home birth?
>> It was a home birth.
She chose to have a home birth.
And she was so happy.
That's what I want.
That's what I get out of it.
Then she moves on in her life.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Good morning.
I pulled an
all-nighter last night.
>> Did you?
>> Yeah.
I'm happy to see you.
My friend had a baby, so
I was with her all night.
>> I'm working on this
documentary about birth.
And that's been so rewarding.
I feel like that's
my passion project.
>> Why wouldn't we have seen any
evidence of this in the first
30 weeks?
Do you know what I mean?
>> Well, it is notorious to
pick that up with a stillbirth.
That's how you
usually pick it up.
There's this growth
restriction, growth restriction.
The baby tries to overcome it,
sends blood up to the brain
so they have a nice
bigger head than body.
And then at a certain
point, there's nothing left.
And the kid dies.
And then you start
doing all these tests.
So unusual to find it
in the middle of things.
That's a good year for
me if I find it more.
>> All right, my lady.
Well, I'm going to stay close.
I'll be within 10
minutes of you.
But I'm not going to
hound you and follow you.
And as soon as you get a couple
of contractions, let me know.
>> I'm very pro-midwifery.
And I really want to shed some
light on the misinformation
out there about birth and
the fear-based information.
>> If you dare go vote.
Where do you have to vote?
>> Do you feel cheated?
Do you feel like you missed out?
>> Yes and no.
The other births that we
filmed or that we saw,
there's just that moment.
It's like the orgasm at the
end, you know what I mean?
Where they put this
baby in your arms
and you see these women
just like, oh my God.
But maybe that's the
way he needed to come.
He wasn't strong enough
for a vaginal delivery.
He was very growth-restricted.
He was breech.
He had the cord around
his neck really tight.
He had a lot of factors
that could have been really
difficult vaginally for him.
I think he would have survived.
But a lot of things were
messed up in the process.
We didn't have bonding
right after birth.
We had a very hard
time breastfeeding--
a very hard time.
Luckily, thank God, there
was nothing wrong with him.
And he's in good health.
But he was such a
surprise in every way.
I thought we were going to
have this beautiful home birth.
Maybe we'd film it,
maybe we wouldn't.
I didn't really think
we'd end up in the film.
So I was even
surprised about that.
Are you smiling?
Are you smiling at Auntie Ricki?
She was your doula.
She was there.
>> You remember me, don't you?
>> Look who you got.
Look who you got.
>> We got this boy.